
1. Metabolism. 2010 Nov;59(11):1556-61. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2010.01.027. Epub
2010 Mar 4.

The relationship between heat shock protein 72 expression in skeletal muscle and 
insulin sensitivity is dependent on adiposity.

Henstridge DC(1), Forbes JM, Penfold SA, Formosa MF, Dougherty S, Gasser A, de
Courten MP, Cooper ME, Kingwell BA, de Courten B.

Author information: 
(1)Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, 3004, VIC,
Australia.

Decreased gene expression of heat shock protein 72 (HSP72) in skeletal muscle is 
associated with insulin resistance in humans. We aimed to determine whether HSP72
protein expression in insulin-sensitive tissues is related to criterion standard 
measures of adiposity and insulin resistance in a young healthy human population 
free of hyperglycemia. Healthy participants (N = 17; age, 30 ± 3 years) underwent
measurement of body composition (dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry), a maximum
aerobic capacity test (VO(2max)), an oral glucose tolerance test, and a
hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp (M) to access insulin sensitivity. Skeletal
muscle and subcutaneous adipose tissue biopsies were obtained by percutaneous
needle biopsy. HSP72 protein expression in skeletal muscle was inversely related 
to percentage body fat (r = -0.54, P < .05) and remained significant after
adjustment for age and sex (P < .05). Insulin sensitivity was also related to
HSP72 protein expression in skeletal muscle (r = 0.52, P < .05); however, this
relationship disappeared after adjustment for percentage body fat (P = .2). In
adipose tissue, HSP72 protein expression was not related to adiposity or insulin 
sensitivity. Physical activity and aerobic fitness did not show any association
with HSP72 protein expression in either tissue studied. A lower expression of
HSP72 protein in human skeletal muscle was associated with increased adiposity
and decreased insulin sensitivity in healthy individuals. These findings are
consistent with rodent data suggesting that HSP72 stimulates fat oxidation with
consequent reduction in fat storage and adiposity.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.metabol.2010.01.027 
PMID: 20199785  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

