
1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Mar;96(3):787-91. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-2028. Epub
2010 Dec 22.

Central and peripheral endocannabinoids and cognate acylethanolamides in humans: 
association with race, adiposity, and energy expenditure.

Jumpertz R(1), Guijarro A, Pratley RE, Piomelli D, Krakoff J.

Author information: 
(1)Obesity and Diabetes Clinical Research Section, National Institutes of
Health/National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases/Department of Health and Human Services, 4212 North 16th Street,
Phoenix, Arizona 85016, USA. jumpertzr@mail.nih.gov

Erratum in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Jun 1;96(6):1908.

CONTEXT: Peripheral and central endocannabinoids and cognate acylethanolamides
(AEs) may play important but distinct roles in regulating energy balance.
OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that in humans central/peripheral endocannabinoids are
differently associated with adiposity and energy expenditure and differ by race.
DESIGN: We examined associations of arachindonoylethanolamide,
2-arachidonoylglycerol, palmitoylethanolamide, and oleoylethanolamide (OEA)
assayed in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with race, adiposity, and energy 
expenditure.
SETTING/PARTICIPANTS: In this monitored clinical inpatient study, CSF was
obtained by lumbar puncture in 27 individuals (12 Caucasian, 11 American Indian, 
and four African-American). Twenty-four hour and sleep energy expenditure were
measured by indirect calorimetry in a respiratory chamber.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Samples were analyzed from a previous study originally
designed to test a blood-brain barrier leptin transport deficit in human obesity.
RESULTS: CSF (but not peripheral) 2-arachidonoylglycerol was significantly
increased in American Indians compared with Caucasians (18.48 ± 6.17 vs. 10.62 ± 
4.58 pmol/ml, P < 0.01). In the whole group, peripheral AEs were positively but
in CSF negatively associated with adiposity. However, in multivariate models
adjusted for the other peripheral and CSF AEs, peripheral
arachindonoylethanolamide was the only AE significantly associated with
adiposity. Interestingly, CSF OEA concentrations were positively associated with 
adjusted 24 hour and sleep energy expenditure (r = 0.47, P < 0.05; r = 0.42, P < 
0.05), but peripheral OEA was not.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate a central alteration of the endocannabinoid
system in American Indians and furthermore show that AEs in both compartments
play an important but distinct role in human energy balance regulation.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2010-2028 
PMCID: PMC3047230
PMID: 21177788  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

