
1. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e21006. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021006. Epub 2011 Jun 20.

Brown adipose tissue in humans is activated by elevated plasma catecholamines
levels and is inversely related to central obesity.

Wang Q(1), Zhang M, Ning G, Gu W, Su T, Xu M, Li B, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory for Endocrine Tumors and Key Laboratory for Endocrine 
and Metabolic Diseases of Chinese Health Ministry, Rui-Jin Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao-Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have shown that adult human possess active brown
adipose tissue (BAT), which might be important in controlling obesity. It is
known that ß-adrenoceptor-UCP1 system regulates BAT in rodent, but its influence 
in adult humans remains to be shown. The present study is to determine whether
BAT activity can be independently stimulated by elevated catecholamines levels in
adult human, and whether it is associated with their adiposity.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We studied 14 patients with pheochromocytoma and 
14 normal subjects who had performed both ¹⁸F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography/computed tomography (¹⁸F-FDG PET/CT) and plasma total
metanephrine (TMN) measurements during 2007-2010. The BAT detection rate and the 
mean BAT activity were significantly higher in patients with elevated TMN levels 
(Group A: 6/8 and 6.7±2.1 SUVmean· g/ml) than patients with normal TMN
concentrations (Group B: 0/6 and 0.4±0.04 SUVmean· g/ml) and normal subjects
(Group C: 0/14 and 0.4±0.03 SUVmean·g/ml). BAT activities were positively
correlated with TMN levels (R = 0.83, p<0.0001) and were inversely related to
body mass index (R = -0.47, p = 0.010), visceral fat areas (R = -0.39,
p = 0.044), visceral/total fat areas (R = -0.52, p = 0.0043) and waist
circumferences (R = -0.43, p = 0.019). Robust regression revealed that TMN
(R = 0.81, p<0.0001) and waist circumferences (R = -0.009, p = 0.009) were the
two independent predictors of BAT activities.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Brown adipose tissue activity in adult human can be
activated by elevated plasma TMN levels, such as in the case of patients with
pheochromocytoma, and is negatively associated with central adiposity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021006 
PMCID: PMC3118816
PMID: 21701596  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

