
1. Ann Hum Biol. 2011 Jul;38(4):410-28. doi: 10.3109/03014460.2011.592513. Epub 2011
Jun 17.

Evidence for the intra-uterine programming of adiposity in later life.

Fall CH(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, University of Southampton, Southampton
General Hospital, Southampton, UK. chdf@mrc.soton.ac.uk

AIM: Research in animals has shown that altering foetal nutrition by
under-nourishing or over-nourishing the mother or rendering her diabetic or
foetal exposure to glucocorticoids and toxins can programme obesity in later
life. The increased adiposity is mediated by permanent changes in appetite, food 
choices, physical activity and energy metabolism. In humans, increased adiposity 
has been shown in people who experienced foetal under-nutrition due to maternal
famine or over-nutrition due to maternal diabetes. Lower birth weight (a proxy
for foetal under-nutrition) is associated with a reduced adult lean mass and
increased intra-abdominal fat. Higher birth-weight caused by maternal diabetes is
associated with increased total fat mass and obesity in later life. There is
growing evidence that maternal obesity, without diabetes, is also a risk factor
for obesity in the child, due to foetal over-nutrition effects. Maternal smoking 
is associated with an increased risk of obesity in the children, although a
causal link has not been proven. Other foetal exposures associated with increased
adiposity in animals include glucocorticoids and endocrine disruptors.
CONCLUSIONS: Reversing the current obesity epidemic will require greater
attention to, and better understanding of, these inter-generational
(mother-offspring) factors that programme body composition during early
development.

DOI: 10.3109/03014460.2011.592513 
PMCID: PMC3428869
PMID: 21682572  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

