
1. Ethn Dis. 2012 Winter;22(1):65-71.

Exploring differences in adiposity in two U.S. Hispanic populations of Mexican
origin using social, behavioral, physiologic and genetic markers: the IRAS Family
Study.

Young KA(1), Fingerlin TE, Langefeld CD, Lorenzo C, Haffner SM, Wagenknecht LE,
Norris JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Colorado School of Public Health, University of
Colorado Denver, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The census classification of Hispanic origin is used in
epidemiological studies to group individuals, even though there is geographical, 
cultural, and genetic diversity within Hispanic Americans of purportedly similar 
backgrounds. We observed differences in our measures of adiposity between our two
Mexican American populations, and examined whether these differences were
attributed to social, behavioral, physiologic or genetic differences between the 
two populations.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: In the IRAS Family Study, we examined 478 Hispanics 
from San Antonio, Texas and 447 Hispanics from the San Luis Valley, Colorado.
Associations with body mass index (BMI), visceral adipose tissue area (VAT), and 
subcutaneous adipose tissue area (SAT) using social, behavioral, physiologic and 
genetic variables were examined.
RESULTS: Hispanics of Mexican origin in our clinic population in San Antonio had 
significantly higher mean BMI (31.09 vs. 28.35 kg/m2), VAT (126.3 vs. 105.5 cm2),
and SAT (391.6 vs. 336.9 cm2), than Hispanics of Mexican origin in the San Luis
Valley. The amount of variation in adiposity explained by clinic population was
4.5% for BMI, 2.8% for VAT, and 2.7% for SAT. After adjustment, clinic population
was no longer associated with VAT and SAT, but remained associated with BMI,
although the amount of variation explained by population was substantially less
(1.0% for BMI).
CONCLUSION: Adiposity differences within this population of Mexican origin can be
largely explained by social, behavioral, physiologic and genetic differences.


PMCID: PMC4020784
PMID: 22774311  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

