
1. Br J Nutr. 2013 May;109(9):1557-72. doi: 10.1017/S0007114512006150. Epub 2013 Feb
27.

Associations between dietary variety and measures of body adiposity: a systematic
review of epidemiological studies.

Vadiveloo M(1), Dixon LB, Parekh N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Food Studies and Public Health, Steinhardt School,
New York University, 411 Lafayette Street, New York, NY 10003, USA.

Dietary variety is positively correlated with energy intake in most studies.
However, the associations between dietary variety and measures of body adiposity 
are inconsistent in the literature, which limits the development of clear
national nutrition recommendations regarding dietary variety. In the present
systematic review, we critically evaluate the associations between dietary
variety and measures of body adiposity among healthy adults within the existing
literature. We conducted a systematic search of the MEDLINE and Web of Science
databases in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews
and Meta-Analyses statement to examine these associations. We identified
twenty-six studies in total that investigated the associations between dietary
variety and body adiposity measures. Total variety was non-significantly
associated with body adiposity in most studies, while variety in recommended
foods was either inversely associated (six out of ten studies) or
non-significantly associated (three out of ten studies) with body adiposity.
Conversely, variety in non-recommended foods (i.e. sources of added sugars and
solid fats) increased the likelihood of excess adiposity in most studies (six out
of nine studies). Definitions and measurement of dietary variety were
inconsistent across studies and contributed to some of the discrepancies noted in
the literature. In conclusion, among the studies that met the inclusion criteria 
for the present review, dietary variety was inconsistently associated with body
adiposity in diverse populations. Using consistent and specific definitions of
dietary variety may help provide further insight into the associations between
dietary variety and excess adiposity before definitive public health messages are
ma

DOI: 10.1017/S0007114512006150 
PMID: 23445540  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

