
1. Diabetes Care. 2013 Mar;36(3):701-7. doi: 10.2337/dc12-1089. Epub 2012 Nov 16.

Long-term changes in adiposity and glycemic control are associated with past
adenovirus infection.

Lin WY(1), Dubuisson O, Rubicz R, Liu N, Allison DB, Curran JE, Comuzzie AG,
Blangero J, Leach CT, Göring H, Dhurandhar NV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, College of Public Health,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Comment in
    Diabetes Care. 2013 Sep;36(9):e162.
    Diabetes Care. 2013 Sep;36(9):e161.
    Diabetes Care. 2013 Oct;36(10):e184.

OBJECTIVE: Ad36, a human adenovirus, increases adiposity but improves glycemic
control in animal models. Similarly, natural Ad36 infection is cross-sectionally 
associated with greater adiposity and better glycemic control in humans. This
study compared longitudinal observations in indices of adiposity (BMI and body
fat percentage) and glycemic control (fasting glucose and insulin) in
Ad36-infected versus uninfected adults.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Baseline sera from Hispanic men and women (n =
1,400) were screened post hoc for the presence of Ad36-specific antibodies.
Indices of adiposity and glycemic control at baseline and at ~10 years past the
baseline were compared between seropositive and seronegative subjects, with
adjustment for age and sex. In addition to age and sex, indices of glycemic
control were adjusted for baseline BMI and were analyzed only for nondiabetic
subjects.
RESULTS: Seropositive subjects (14.5%) had greater adiposity at baseline,
compared with seronegative subjects. Longitudinally, seropositive subjects showed
greater adiposity indices but lower fasting insulin levels. Subgroup analyses
revealed that Ad36-seropositivity was associated with better baseline glycemic
control and lower fasting insulin levels over time in the normal-weight group
(BMI ≤25 kg/m(2)) and longitudinally, with greater adiposity in the overweight
(BMI 25-30 kg/m(2)) and obese (BMI >30 kg/m(2)) men. Statistically, the
differences between seropositive and seronegative individuals were modest in
light of the multiple tests performed.
CONCLUSIONS: This study strengthens the plausibility that in humans, Ad36
increases adiposity and attenuates deterioration of glycemic control.
Panoptically, the study raises the possibility that certain infections may
modulate obesity or diabetes risk. A comprehensive understanding of these
under-recognized factors is needed to effectively combat such metabolic
disorders.

DOI: 10.2337/dc12-1089 
PMCID: PMC3579356
PMID: 23160725  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

