
1. J Bone Miner Res. 2013 Mar;28(3):489-96. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1776.

Adenovirus 36, adiposity, and bone strength in late-adolescent females.

Laing EM(1), Tripp RA, Pollock NK, Baile CA, Della-Fera MA, Rayalam S, Tompkins
SM, Keys DA, Lewis RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Foods and Nutrition, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA.

Adenovirus 36 (Ad36) is the only adenovirus to date that has been linked with
obesity in humans. Our previous studies in late-adolescent females suggest that
excess weight in the form of fat mass is associated with lower cortical bone
strength. The purpose of this study was to assess the relationship between
Ad36-specific antibodies, adiposity, and bone strength in our sample of
late-adolescent females. A cross-sectional study of 115 females aged 18 to 19
years was performed. Participants were classified according to adiposity by
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (body fat percentage as normal-fat [ < 32% body 
fat; n = 93] or high-fat [ ≥ 32% body fat; n = 22]), and according to the
presence of Ad36-specific neutralizing antibodies. Peripheral quantitative
computed tomography measured bone parameters at the 4% (trabecular bone) and 20% 
(cortical bone) site, and muscle cross-sectional area (MCSA) at the 66% site,
from the distal metaphyses of the radius and the tibia. Bone strength was
determined from volumetric bone mineral density and bone geometry to calculate
bone strength index (BSI; trabecular site) and polar strength-strain index (SSI; 
cortical site). After adjustment for MCSA and limb length, radial SSI was lower
in Ad36+  versus Ad36- subjects from the high-fat group (p < 0.03), but not the
normal-fat group. No significant differences were observed between groups in
tibial SSI or BSI. These data support an association of adiposity and cortical
bone strength at the radius with the presence of neutralizing antibodies to Ad36 
in late-adolescent females.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.1776 
PMCID: PMC5705225
PMID: 23296755  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

