
1. Diabetes. 2013 Jun;62(6):1923-31. doi: 10.2337/db12-0977. Epub 2013 Jan 11.

Decreased RB1 mRNA, protein, and activity reflect obesity-induced altered
adipogenic capacity in human adipose tissue.

Moreno-Navarrete JM(1), Petrov P, Serrano M, Ortega F, García-Ruiz E, Oliver P,
Ribot J, Ricart W, Palou A, Bonet ML, Fernández-Real JM.

Author information: 
(1)Service of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Nutrition, Institut d'Investigació
Biomèdica de Girona and CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición
CB06/03/010, Girona, Spain.

Retinoblastoma (Rb1) has been described as an essential player in white adipocyte
differentiation in mice. No studies have been reported thus far in human adipose 
tissue or human adipocytes. We aimed to investigate the possible role and
regulation of RB1 in adipose tissue in obesity using human samples and animal and
cell models. Adipose RB1 (mRNA, protein, and activity) was negatively associated 
with BMI and insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) while positively associated with the
expression of adipogenic genes (PPARγ and IRS1) in both visceral and subcutaneous
human adipose tissue. BMI increase was the main contributor to adipose RB1
downregulation. In rats, adipose Rb1 gene expression and activity decreased in
parallel to dietary-induced weight gain and returned to baseline with weight
loss. RB1 gene and protein expression and activity increased significantly during
human adipocyte differentiation. In fully differentiated adipocytes, transient
knockdown of Rb1 led to loss of the adipogenic phenotype. In conclusion, Rb1
seems to play a permissive role for human adipose tissue function, being
downregulated in obesity and increased during differentiation of human
adipocytes. Rb1 knockdown findings further implicate Rb1 as necessary for
maintenance of adipogenic characteristics in fully differentiated adipocytes.

DOI: 10.2337/db12-0977 
PMCID: PMC3661645
PMID: 23315497  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

