
1. Hum Hered. 2013;75(2-4):57-79. doi: 10.1159/000353585. Epub 2013 Sep 27.

Functional analysis of seven genes linked to body mass index and adiposity by
genome-wide association studies: a review.

Speakman JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key State Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics
and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, PR China;
Institute of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Aberdeen,
Aberdeen, UK.

Erratum in
    Hum Hered. 2013;76(2):52.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified a total of about 40 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that show significant linkage to body mass index,
a widely utilised surrogate measure of adiposity. However, only 8 of these
associations have been confirmed by follow-up GWAS using more sophisticated
measures of adiposity (computed tomography). Among these 8, there is a SNP close 
to the gene FTO which has been the subject of considerable work to diagnose its
function. The remaining 7 SNPs are adjacent to, or within, the genes NEGR1,
TMEM18, ETV5, FLJ35779, LINGO2, SH2B1 and GIPR, most of which are less well
studied than FTO, particularly in the context of obesity. This article reviews
the available data on the functions of these genes, including information gleaned
from studies in humans and animal models. At present, we have virtually no
information on the putative mechanism associating the genes FLJ35779 and LINGO2
to obesity. All of these genes are expressed in the brain, and for 2 of them
(SH2B1 and GIPR), a direct link to the appetite regulation system is known. SH2B1
is an enhancer of intracellular signalling in the JAK-STAT pathway, and GIPR is
the receptor for an appetite-linked hormone (GIP) produced by the alimentary
tract. NEGR1, ETV5 and SH2B1 all have suggested roles in neurite outgrowth, and
hence SNPs adjacent to these genes may affect development of the energy balance
circuitry. Although the genes have central patterns of gene expression, implying 
a central neuronal connection to energy balance, for at least 4 of them (NEGR1,
TMEM18, SH2B1 and GIPR), there are also significant peripheral functions related 
to adipose tissue biology. These functions may contribute to their effects on the
obese phenotype.

Â© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000353585 
PMID: 24081222  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

