
1. J Nutr. 2013 Dec;143(12):1982-8. doi: 10.3945/jn.113.179192. Epub 2013 Sep 25.

S-adenosylmethionine is associated with fat mass and truncal adiposity in older
adults.

Elshorbagy AK(1), Nijpels G, Valdivia-Garcia M, Stehouwer CD, Ocke M, Refsum H,
Dekker JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) is synthesized from methionine, which is abundant in
animal-derived protein, in an energy-consuming reaction. SAM and
S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) correlate with body mass index (BMI). Plasma total
concentration of the SAM-associated product cysteine (tCys) correlates with fat
mass in humans and cysteine promotes adiposity in animals. In a cross-sectional
study of 610 participants, we investigated whether SAM and SAH are associated
with BMI via lean mass or fat mass and dietary protein sources as determinants of
SAM and tCys concentrations. Plasma SAM was not associated with lean mass, but
mean adjusted fat mass increased from 24 kg (95% CI: 22.6, 25.1) to 30 kg (95%
CI: 28.7, 31.3) across SAM quartiles (P < 0.001) and trunk fat:total fat ratio
increased from 0.48 to 0.52 (P < 0.001). Erythrocyte SAM was also positively
associated with fat mass and trunk fat:total fat ratio. The association of SAM
with fat mass was not weakened by adjustment for serum tCys, lipids, creatinine, 
or dietary or lifestyle confounders. Concentrations of the SAM precursor,
methionine, and the SAM product, SAH, were not independently associated with
adiposity. Intake of animal-derived protein was not related to serum methionine
but was positively associated with plasma SAM (partial r = 0.11) and serum tCys
(partial r = 0.13; P < 0.05 for both after adjustment for age, gender, and total 
energy intake). In conclusion, plasma SAM, but not methionine, is independently
associated with fat mass and truncal adiposity, suggesting increased conversion
of methionine to SAM in obese individuals. Prospective studies are needed to
investigate the interactions among dietary energy and animal protein content, SAM
concentrations, and change in body weight and cardiometabolic risk.

DOI: 10.3945/jn.113.179192 
PMID: 24068793  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

