
1. Bone. 2013 Oct;56(2):255-65. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2013.06.016. Epub 2013 Jun 22.

Determinants of bone marrow adiposity: the modulation of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-γ2 activity as a central mechanism.

Sadie-Van Gijsen H(1), Hough FS, Ferris WF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, University of Stellenbosch, Francie van Zijl Drive, Tygerberg
7505, South Africa. hsadie@sun.ac.za

Although the presence of adipocytes in the bone marrow is a normal physiological 
phenomenon, the role of these cells in bone homeostasis and during pathological
states has not yet been fully delineated. As osteoblasts and adipocytes originate
from a common progenitor, with an inverse relationship existing between
osteoblastogenesis and adipogenesis, bone marrow adiposity often negatively
correlates with osteoblast number and bone mineral density. Bone adiposity can be
affected by several physiological and pathophysiological factors, with abnormal, 
elevated marrow fat resulting in a pathological state. This review focuses on the
regulation of bone adiposity by physiological factors, including aging,
mechanical loading and growth factor expression, as well as the
pathophysiological factors, including diseases such as anorexia nervosa and
dyslipidemia, and pharmacological agents such as thiazolidinediones and statins. 
Although these factors regulate bone marrow adiposity via a plethora of different
intracellular signaling pathways, these diverse pathways often converge on the
modulation of the expression and/or activity of the pro-adipogenic transcription 
factor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-γ2, suggesting that any 
factor that affects PPAR-γ2 may have an impact on the fat content of bone.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2013.06.016 
PMID: 23800517  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

