
1. Proc Nutr Soc. 2014 May;73(2):319-29. doi: 10.1017/S0029665114000019. Epub 2014
Feb 19.

Physical activity, sedentary time and adiposity during the first two decades of
life.

Ekelund U(1), Hildebrand M(1), Collings PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sport Medicine, Norwegian School of Sport Sciences, Oslo,
Norway.
(2)Medical Research Council Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.

High amounts of time spent sedentary and low levels of physical activity have
been implicated in the process of excessive adiposity gains in youth. The aim of 
this review is to discuss the role of physical activity, sedentary time and
behaviour (i.e. television (TV)-viewing) in relation to adiposity during the
first two decades of life with a specific focus on whether the association
between sedentary time, and behaviour and adiposity is independent of physical
activity. We identified nine cohort studies (three prospective) whether sedentary
time was associated with adiposity independent of physical activity. Eight of
these studies suggested that sedentary time was unrelated to adiposity when
physical activity was taken into account. Results from studies (n 8) examining
the independent association between TV-viewing and adiposity independent of
physical activity were mixed. Those that observed a positive association between 
TV-viewing and adiposity independent of physical activity discussed that the
association may be due to residual confounding. A few additional studies have
also challenged the general notion that low levels of physical activity leads to 
fatness and suggested that higher baseline fatness may be predictive of a decline
in physical activity. It appears unlikely that higher levels of sedentary time
are associated with or predictive of, higher levels of adiposity when physical
activity is controlled for in youth. Specific sedentary behaviours such as
TV-viewing may be associated with adiposity independent of physical activity but 
the results may be explained by residual confounding.

DOI: 10.1017/S0029665114000019 
PMID: 24548769  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

