
1. J Sleep Res. 2014 Jun;23(3):326-34. doi: 10.1111/jsr.12114. Epub 2013 Dec 16.

Mother-reported sleep, accelerometer-estimated sleep and weight status in Mexican
American children: sleep duration is associated with increased adiposity and risk
for overweight/obese status.

Martinez SM(1), Greenspan LC, Butte NF, Gregorich SE, De Groat CL, Deardorff J,
Penilla C, Pasch LA, Flores E, Tschann JM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Pediatrics, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.

We know of no studies comparing parent-reported sleep with
accelerometer-estimated sleep in their relation to paediatric adiposity. We
examined: (i) the reliability of mother-reported sleep compared with
accelerometer-estimated sleep; and (ii) the relationship between both sleep
measures and child adiposity. The current cross-sectional study included 303
Mexican American mother-child pairs recruited from Kaiser Permanente Northern
California. We measured sleep duration using maternal report and accelerometry
and child anthropometrics. Concordance between sleep measures was evaluated using
the Bland-Altman method. We conducted zero-ordered correlations between
mother-reported sleep, accelerometer-estimated sleep and child BMI z-scores
(BMIz). Using linear regression, we examined three models to assess child BMIz
with mother-reported sleep (model 1), accelerometer-estimated sleep (model 2) and
both sleep measures (model 3). Children had an average age of 8.86 years
(SD = 0.82). Mothers reported that their child slept 9.81 ± 0.74 h [95%
confidence interval (CI): 9.72, 9.89], compared to 9.58 ± 0.71 h (95% CI: 9.50,
9.66) based on accelerometry. Mother-reported sleep and accelerometer-estimated
sleep were correlated (r = 0.33, P < 0.001). BMIz outcomes were associated
negatively with mother-reported sleep duration (model 1: β = -0.13; P = 0.02) and
accelerometer-estimated sleep duration (model 2: β = -0.17; P < 0.01). Accounting
for both sleep measures, only accelerometer-measured sleep was related to BMIz
(model 3: β = -0.14, P = 0.02). Each sleep measure was related significantly to
adiposity, independent of covariates. Accelerometry appeared to be a more
reliable measure of children's sleep than maternal report, yet maternal report
may be sufficient to examine the sleep-adiposity relationship when resources are 
limited.

© 2013 European Sleep Research Society.

DOI: 10.1111/jsr.12114 
PMCID: PMC4492432
PMID: 24329818  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

