
1. Horm Mol Biol Clin Investig. 2014 Jul;19(1):13-24. doi: 10.1515/hmbci-2014-0015.

The influence of sex steroids on adipose tissue growth and function.

Law J, Bloor I, Budge H, Symonds ME.

Obesity remains a major global health concern. Understanding the metabolic
influences of the obesity epidemic in the human population on maintenance of a
healthy weight and metabolic profile is still of great significance. The
importance and role of white adipose tissue has been long established,
particularly with excess adiposity. Brown adipose tissue (BAT), however, has only
recently been shown to contribute significantly to the metabolic signature of
mammals outside the previously recognised role in small mammals and neonates.
BAT's detection in adults has led to a renewed interest and is now considered to 
be a potential therapeutic target to prevent excess white fat accumulation in
obesity, a theory further promoted by the recent discovery of beige fat. Adipose 
tissue distribution varies significantly between genders. Pre-menopausal females 
often show enhanced lower and peripheral fat deposition in adiposity deposition
compared to the male profile of central and visceral fat accumulation with
obesity. This sex disparity is partly attributed to the different effects of sex 
hormone profiles and interactions on the adipose tissue system. In this review,
we explore this intricate relationship and show how modifications in the effects 
of sex hormones impact on both brown and white adipose tissues. We also discuss
the impact of sex hormones on activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
(HPA) axis and how the three pathways between adiposity, HPA and sex steroids can
have a major contribution to the prevention or maintenance of obesity and
therefore on overall health.

DOI: 10.1515/hmbci-2014-0015 
PMID: 25390013  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

