
1. J Biosci. 2014 Dec;39(5):867-75.

Uncoupling protein 2 gene (UCP2) 45-bp I/D polymorphism is associated with
adiposity among Malaysian women.

Say YH(1), Ban ZL, Arumugam Y, Kaur T, Tan ML, Chia PP, Fan SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Science, Centre for Foundation
Studies, Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman (UTAR) Perak Campus, Kampar, Perak,
Malaysia, sayyh@utar.edu.my.

This study investigated the association of Uncoupling Protein 2 gene (UCP2) 45-bp
I/D polymorphism with obesity and adiposity in 926 Malaysian subjects (416
males;265 obese; 102/672/152 Malays/Chinese/Indians). The overall minor allele
frequency (MAF) was 0.14, while MAFs according to Malay/Chinese/Indian were
0.17/0.12/0.21. The polymorphism was associated with ethnicity, obesity and
overall adiposity (total body fat percentage, TBF), but not gender and central
adiposity (waist-hip ratio, WHR). Gender- and ethnicity-stratified analysis
revealed that within males, the polymorphism was not associated with ethnicity
and anthropometric classes. However, within females, significantly more Indians, 
obese and those with high TBF carried I allele. Logistic regression analysis
among females further showed the polymorphism was associated with obesity and
overall adiposity; however, when adjusted for age and ethnicity, this association
was abolished for obesity but remained significant for overall adiposity [Odds
Ratio (OR) for ID genotype = 2.02 (CI=1.18, 3.45; p=0.01); I allele =1.81
(CI=1.15, 2.84; p=0.01)]. Indeed, covariate analysis controlling for age and
ethnicity also showed that those carrying ID genotype or I allele had
significantly higher TBF than the rest. In conclusion, UCP2 45-bp I/D
polymorphism is associated with overall adiposity among Malaysian women.


PMID: 25431415  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

