
1. Anthropol Anz. 2014;71(4):329-46. doi: 10.1127/0003-5548/2014/0406.

The relationship between birth weight, adiposity rebound and overweight at the
age of 17 years (results of the Lithuanian longitudinal growth study,
1990 - 2008).

Suchomlinov A(1), Tutkuviene J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Anthropology, Faculty of Medicine,
Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship between overweight 
and obesity at the age of 17 years with a birth weight and time of an adiposity
rebound. The results were based on data (N = 1535) collected from the personal
health records of children born in 1990 in Vilnius city and region. The further
growth of newborns with normal (3000 - 3999 g), suboptimal (2500 - 2999 g) and
large (≥ 4000 g) birth weight was analyzed. Statistically significant results (p 
< 0.05) were obtained in girls: at the age of 17, the BMI of suboptimal, normal
and large birth weight females was 19.87 ± 2.23 kg/m², 20.98 ± 2.78 kg/m² and
22.20 ± 3.52 kg/m² respectively. We also found that children with large birth
weight had the highest risk to become overweight or obese later in their life.
Both boys and girls overweight at the age of 17 had an earlier adiposity rebound 
(at the age of 5 years) in comparison with non-overweight children (their
adiposity rebound had happened at the age of 6 - 7 years). However, the majority 
of children with an early adiposity rebound did not become overweight on the
subsequent age period at once - it might happen later, already at the
adolescence. Thus it is very important to carefully screen the growth of
preschool children and start preventive measures against the overweight and
obesity as early as possible.

DOI: 10.1127/0003-5548/2014/0406 
PMID: 25774521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

