
1. J Endocrinol Invest. 2015 Jan;38(1):81-9. doi: 10.1007/s40618-014-0163-9. Epub
2014 Aug 31.

Twelve-month treatment with Liraglutide ameliorates Visceral Adiposity Index and 
common cardiovascular risk factors in type 2 diabetes outpatients.

Russo GT(1), Labate AM(2), Giandalia A(2), Romeo EL(2), Villari P(2), Alibrandi
A(3), Perdichizzi G(2), Cucinotta D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Policlinico Universitario G.
Martino, University of Messina, Via C. Valeria, 98121, Messina, Italy.
giuseppina.russo@unime.it.
(2)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Policlinico Universitario G.
Martino, University of Messina, Via C. Valeria, 98121, Messina, Italy.
(3)Department of Economical, Business and Environmental Sciences and Quantitative
Methods, University of Messina, Messina, Italy.

AIM: In addition to the effects on glycemic control and body weight, GLP-1
receptor agonists may favorably affect other major cardiovascular disease (CVD)
risk factors, although currently available data are still sparse. In this
retrospective study, we evaluated the effects of 12-month treatment with
liraglutide on major CVD risk factors in 115 type 2 diabetes outpatients (60 men 
and 55 women), on stable hypoglycemic, anti-hypertensive and/or lipid-lowering
therapy.
METHODS: Clinical and anthropometric data, metabolic and lipid profile, as well
as the Visceral Adiposity Index (VAI), an obesity-related CVD risk factor, were
measured in all participants at baseline and after 12-month treatment.
RESULTS: Treatment with liraglutide was associated with a significant reduction
from baseline values of fasting blood glucose (-42.1 mg/dl, P < 0.05), HbA1c
(-1.5 %, -17 mmol/mol, P < 0.05), body weight (-7.1 kg, P < 0.05), waist
circumference (-6.8 cm, P < 0.001), total-cholesterol (-27.4 mg/dl, P < 0.05),
LDL-cholesterol (-25.4 mg/dl, P < 0.05), triglycerides (-56.1 mg/dl, P < 0.05),
and non-HDL-C (-36.6 mg/dl, P < 0.05) and an increase of HDL-cholesterol
concentrations (+9.3 mg/dl, P < 0.001), a significant reduction in both systolic 
and diastolic blood pressure (-14.7 mmHg, P < 0.001 and -9.0 mmHg, P < 0.05,
respectively) and a decrease of VAI values (-1.6, P < 0.001). All these
differences were independent of changes in BMI and comparable in men and women.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, 12-month treatment with liraglutide in add-on to
on-going hypoglycemic therapy significantly ameliorates all major CVD risk
factors and reduces cardiometabolic risk, as estimated by VAI values.

DOI: 10.1007/s40618-014-0163-9 
PMID: 25173876  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

