
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 May 20;105(20):7257-62. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0706473105. Epub 2008 May 5.

Leptin responsiveness restored by amylin agonism in diet-induced obesity:
evidence from nonclinical and clinical studies.

Roth JD(1), Roland BL, Cole RL, Trevaskis JL, Weyer C, Koda JE, Anderson CM,
Parkes DG, Baron AD.

Author information: 
(1)Amylin Pharmaceuticals, Inc., San Diego, CA 92121, USA.
jonathan.roth@amylin.com

Body weight is regulated by complex neurohormonal interactions between endocrine 
signals of long-term adiposity (e.g., leptin, a hypothalamic signal) and
short-term satiety (e.g., amylin, a hindbrain signal). We report that concurrent 
peripheral administration of amylin and leptin elicits synergistic, fat-specific 
weight loss in leptin-resistant, diet-induced obese rats. Weight loss synergy was
specific to amylin treatment, compared with other anorexigenic peptides, and
dissociable from amylin's effect on food intake. The addition of leptin after
amylin pretreatment elicited further weight loss, compared with either
monotherapy condition. In a 24-week randomized, double-blind, clinical
proof-of-concept study in overweight/obese subjects, coadministration of
recombinant human leptin and the amylin analog pramlintide elicited 12.7% mean
weight loss, significantly more than was observed with either treatment alone (P 
< 0.01). In obese rats, amylin pretreatment partially restored hypothalamic
leptin signaling (pSTAT3 immunoreactivity) within the ventromedial, but not the
arcuate nucleus and up-regulated basal and leptin-stimulated signaling in the
hindbrain area postrema. These findings provide both nonclinical and clinical
evidence that amylin agonism restored leptin responsiveness in diet-induced
obesity, suggesting that integrated neurohormonal approaches to obesity
pharmacotherapy may facilitate greater weight loss by harnessing naturally
occurring synergies.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0706473105 
PMCID: PMC2438237
PMID: 18458326  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

