
1. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2009 Sep;17(9):1736-43. doi: 10.1038/oby.2009.184. Epub 
2009 Jun 11.

Enhanced weight loss with pramlintide/metreleptin: an integrated neurohormonal
approach to obesity pharmacotherapy.

Ravussin E(1), Smith SR, Mitchell JA, Shringarpure R, Shan K, Maier H, Koda JE,
Weyer C.

Author information: 
(1)Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA.

The neurohormonal control of body weight involves a complex interplay between
long-term adiposity signals (e.g., leptin), and short-term satiation signals
(e.g., amylin). In diet-induced obese (DIO) rodents, amylin/leptin combination
treatment led to marked, synergistic, fat-specific weight loss. To evaluate the
weight-lowering effect of combined amylin/leptin agonism (with
pramlintide/metreleptin) in human obesity, a 24-week, randomized, double-blind,
active-drug-controlled, proof-of-concept study was conducted in obese or
overweight subjects (N = 177; 63% female; 39 +/- 8 years; BMI 32.0 +/- 2.1
kg/m(2); 93.3 +/- 13.2 kg; mean +/- s.d.). After a 4-week lead-in period with
pramlintide (180 microg b.i.d. for 2 weeks, 360 microg b.i.d. thereafter) and
diet (40% calorie deficit), subjects achieving 2-8% weight loss were randomized
1:2:2 to 20 weeks of treatment with metreleptin (5 mg b.i.d.), pramlintide (360
microg b.i.d.), or pramlintide/metreleptin (360 microg/5 mg b.i.d.). Combination 
treatment with pramlintide/metreleptin led to significantly greater weight loss
from enrollment to week 20 (-12.7 +/- 0.9%; least squares mean +/- s.e.) than
treatment with pramlintide (-8.4 +/- 0.9%; P < 0.001) or metreleptin (-8.2 +/-
1.3%; P < 0.01) alone (evaluable, N = 93). The greater reduction in body weight
was significant as early as week 4, and weight loss continued throughout the
study, without evidence of a plateau. The most common adverse events with
pramlintide/metreleptin were injection site events and nausea, which were mostly 
mild to moderate and decreased over time. These results support further
development of pramlintide/metreleptin as a novel, integrated neurohormonal
approach to obesity pharmacotherapy.

DOI: 10.1038/oby.2009.184 
PMCID: PMC2754219
PMID: 19521351  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

