
1. Lipids. 2010 Aug;45(8):693-700. doi: 10.1007/s11745-010-3442-z. Epub 2010 Jul 14.

trans-fatty acid isomers in adipose tissue have divergent associations with
adiposity in humans.

Smit LA(1), Willett WC, Campos H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, 665 Huntington Ave, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the association between adipose tissue
trans-fatty acid isomers and adiposity. This cross-sectional study included 1,785
subjects from Costa Rica. Fatty acid concentrations (as a percentage of the total
fatty acids) in subcutaneous adipose tissue were assessed by gas-liquid
chromatography. Dietary intakes were assessed with a food frequency
questionnaire. Multivariate linear regression models were used to relate adipose 
tissue trans-fatty acid content to BMI, waist circumference, and skinfold
thickness while adjusting for age, sex, and area of residence. To account for
variations in lifestyle, we adjusted for smoking, physical activity, income,
self-reported history of diabetes and hypertension, and for adipose tissue
alpha-linolenic acid and energy intake in a third model. After adjustments,
positive associations were found between 18:2t-fatty acids (primarily from
partially hydrogenated oils) and BMI, waist circumference, and skinfold thickness
(P for each association <0.01). Rumenic acid was positively associated with
skinfold thickness (P < 0.0001), but not with BMI or waist circumference (P >
0.05). Inverse associations were found between 16:1n-7t-fatty acids and skinfold 
thickness and between 18:1t-fatty acids and BMI and waist circumference (P <
0.0001). This study suggests that individual trans-fatty acid isomers may have
divergent effects on adiposity. 18:2t-fatty acids show consistent positive
associations with measures of adiposity. These isomer-specific associations are
an interesting new finding. Other prospective and intervention studies are
necessary to examine these relationships further.

DOI: 10.1007/s11745-010-3442-z 
PMCID: PMC2922622
PMID: 20628829  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

