
1. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2011 Oct;111(4):1218-24. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00478.2011. Epub 2011 Jun 2.

Metabolic disruptions induced by reduced ambulatory activity in free-living
humans.

Thyfault JP(1), Krogh-Madsen R.

Author information: 
(1)Harry S Truman Memorial Veterans Hospital, Department of Nutrition, Health
Activity Center, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65201, USA.
thyfaultj@missouri.edu

Physical inactivity likely plays a role in the development of insulin resistance 
and obesity; however, direct evidence is minimal and mechanisms of action remain 
unknown. Studying metabolic outcomes that occur after transitioning from higher
to lower levels of physical activity is the best tool to answer these questions. 
Previous studies have successfully used more extreme models of inactivity,
including bed rest, or the cessation of exercise in highly trained endurance
athletes, to provide novel findings. However, these models do not accurately
reflect the type of inactivity experienced by a large majority of the population.
Recent studies have used a more applicable model in which active (∼10,000
steps/day), healthy young controls are asked to transition to an inactive
lifestyle (∼1,500 steps/day) for a 14-day period. The transition to inactivity
resulted in reduced insulin sensitivity and increased central adiposity. This
review will discuss the outcomes of these studies, their implications for the
cause/effect relationship between central adiposity and insulin resistance, and
provide rationale for why inactivity induces these factors. In addition, the
experimental challenges of directly linking acute responses to inactivity to
chronic disease will also be discussed.

DOI: 10.1152/japplphysiol.00478.2011 
PMID: 21636564  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

