
1. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2012 Nov;8(11):679-88. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2012.176. Epub
2012 Sep 25.

Maternal adiposity--a determinant of perinatal and offspring outcomes?

Lawlor DA(1), Relton C, Sattar N, Nelson SM.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Causal Analyses in Translational Epidemiology, School of Social
and Community Medicine, University of Bristol, Oakfield House, Oakfield Grove,
Bristol BS8 2BN, UK. d.a.lawlor@bristol.ac.uk

Experimental and animal data suggest that maternal obesity during pregnancy
adversely affects offspring health in the short-term and the long-term. Whether
these effects occur in humans and influence population health is less clear. This
Review explores evidence from intervention studies and observational studies that
have used designs (such as family-based comparisons and Mendelian randomization) 
that might help improve understanding of the causal effects of maternal obesity
in humans. Collectively, human studies provide evidence that maternal overweight 
and obesity is causally related to pregnancy complications, increased offspring
weight and adiposity at birth, and the difficulties associated with delivery of
large-for-gestational-age infants. The underlying mechanisms for these effects
probably involve maternal and fetal dysregulation of glucose, insulin, lipid and 
amino acid metabolism. Some evidence exists that extreme maternal obesity (BMI
â‰¥40 kg/m(2)) is causally related to a long-term increase in offspring adiposity, 
but further exploration of this relationship is needed. High gestational weight
gain may result in a long-term increase in offspring adiposity if women are
already overweight or have obesity at the start of pregnancy. To date, little
high-quality human evidence exists that any of these effects are mediated by
epigenetic mechanisms, but approaches to appropriately test this possibility are 
being developed.

DOI: 10.1038/nrendo.2012.176 
PMID: 23007319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

