
1. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43159. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043159. Epub 2012 Aug 29.

Ethnic-specific differences in vitamin D status is associated with adiposity.

Sulistyoningrum DC(1), Green TJ, Lear SA, Devlin AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Child and Family Research Institute, Vancouver, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Low circulating 25 hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] concentrations are
common in obesity (BMI ≥30 kg/m(2)) and a negative relationship with body fat
distribution has recently been reported. Ethnic-specific differences in body fat 
distribution have been described with South Asians are reported to have greater
visceral adipose tissue (VAT), which could influence circulating 25(OH)D
concentrations. The objective of this study is to investigate the relationship
between plasma 25(OH)D, adiposity, and body fat distribution in Europeans and
South Asians.
METHODS/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: 187 Europeans and 192 South Asians were assessed for 
demographics, anthropometrics, and plasma 25(OH)D concentrations. Subcutaneous
adipose tissue (SAT) and VAT were quantified by CT scan, and percent body fat by 
DEXA. Data were assessed by general linear models. South Asians had lower
(P<0.001) plasma 25(OH)D concentrations and higher VAT (P = 0.04) than Europeans.
Plasma 25(OH)D concentrations were negatively (P<0.05) associated with BMI, waist
circumference, percent body fat, total adipose tissue, VAT, and SAT in unadjusted
models and negatively (P<0.05) associated with VAT, SAT, and percent body fat
after adjusting for BMI, ethnicity, age, and season of blood collection in males 
and females. When percent body fat, VAT, and SAT were included in the same model,
only VAT remained negatively (P<0.05) associated with plasma 25(OH)D
concentrations. Ethnicity remained significant in all models (P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Compared to other adipose tissue compartments, VAT may have a
distinct role in determining plasma 25(OH)D concentrations, which may account for
the lower levels in South Asians.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043159 
PMCID: PMC3430647
PMID: 22952641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

