
1. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2014 Apr;22(4):1165-71. doi: 10.1002/oby.20643. Epub
2013 Dec 5.

Associations of maternal pre-pregnancy and gestational body size with offspring
longitudinal change in BMI.

Lawrence GM(1), Shulman S, Friedlander Y, Sitlani CM, Burger A, Savitsky B,
Granot-Hershkovitz E, Lumley T, Kwok PY, Hesselson S, Enquobahrie D, Wander PL,
Manor O, Siscovick DS, Hochner H.

Author information: 
(1)Braun School of Public Health, The Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical Center, 
Jerusalem, Israel.

OBJECTIVES: Studies demonstrate associations between changes in obesity-related
phenotypes and cardiovascular risk. Although maternal pre-pregnancy BMI (mppBMI) 
and gestational weight gain (GWG) may be associated with adult offspring
adiposity, no study has examined associations with obesity changes. Associations 
of mppBMI and GWG with longitudinal change in offspring's BMI (ΔBMI) were
examined, and whether associations are explained by offspring genetics was
assessed.
METHODS: A birth cohort of 1400 adults, with data at birth, age 17 and 32 years
was used. After genotyping offspring, genetic scores, predictive of exposures and
outcome were created, and linear regression models with and without scores were
fit to examine the associations of mppBMI and GWG with ΔBMI.
RESULTS: A one SD change in mppBMI and GWG was associated with a 0.83 and a 0.75 
kg/m² increase in ΔBMI, respectively. The association between mppBMI and
offspring ΔBMI was slightly attenuated (12%) with the addition of genetic scores.
In the GWG model, a significant substantial 28.2% decrease in the coefficient was
observed.
CONCLUSIONS: This study points to an association between maternal excess weight
in pregnancy and offspring BMI change from adolescence to adulthood. Genetic
factors may account, in part, for GWG/ΔBMI association. These findings broaden
observations that maternal obesity-related phenotypes have long-term consequences
for offspring health.

Copyright © 2013 The Obesity Society.

DOI: 10.1002/oby.20643 
PMCID: PMC3968220
PMID: 24124160  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

