
1. Nutr Hosp. 2015 Apr 1;31(4):1473-80. doi: 10.3305/nh.2015.31.4.8297.

Association of excessive GWG with adiposity indicators and metabolic diseases of 
their offspring: systematic review.

Pérez-Morales ME(1), Bacardi-Gascon M(2), Jimenez-Cruz A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Ciencias Químicas e Ingeniería, Universidad Autónoma de Baja
California, Mesa de Otay 14418, Tijuana BC.. arturojimenezc@yahoo.com.
(2)Facultad de Medicina y Psicología, Postgrado en Nutrición, Universidad
Autónoma de Baja California, Mesa de Otay 14418, Tijuana BC. México..
arturojimenezc@yahoo.com.

INTRODUCTION: It has been reported that excessive gestational weight gain (GWG)
during pregnancy is associated with an increase in adiposity indicators and
metabolic disorders of the offspring.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this review, using the Institute of Medicine (IOM)
criteria, was to analyze the association of excessive GWG in prospective studies 
with the adiposity indicators and metabolic diseases of the offspring, and the
association of excessive GWG with adiposity indicators and metabolic disease of
the ≥ 15 years offspring.
METHODS: An electronic search was conducted in the MEDLINE/PubMed, EMBASE, and
CINAHL databases of prospective cohort studies published from January 2004 to
September 2014. Selection was restricted to prospective cohort studies where the 
definition of GWG was used according to the IOM-recommendations; and prospective 
cohort studies including offspring ≥ 15 years, independent of using the
definition for excessive GWG.
RESULTS: Nine prospective cohort studies meet the inclusion criteria. Five
studies used the IOM-recommendations for assessing GWG, and six studies assessed 
adiposity or metabolic indicators of their offspring at ≥ 15 years. In seven of
the nine studies, excessive GWG was associated with adiposity and metabolic
diseases. Due to the limitations found, the evidence of the association was shown
to be low.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this review showed, that independently of the
criteria used to diagnose excessive GWG, all the included studies, consistently
showed an association of excessive GWG with adiposity indicators or other
components of metabolic disease early in life, during adolescence or adulthood.
However, due to the limitations of the studies the strength of the evidence was
low. Better designed studies are warranted to confirm a stronger evidence.

Publisher: Introducción Se ha reportado que el aumento excesivo de la ganancia de
peso gestacional (GPG) durante el embarazo está asociada a un aumento en los
indicadores de adiposidad y trastornos metabólicos de su descendencia. Objetivo
El objetivo fue analizar la asociación del aumento excesivo de GPG en estudios
prospectivos, utilizando los criterios del Instituto de medicina (IOM), con
indicadores de adiposidad y enfermedades metabólicas de los descendientes y
estudiar la asociación del aumento excesivo de GPG en estudios prospectivos con
indicadores de adiposidad y enfermedad metabólica de los descendientes ≥ 15 años.
Métodos Se realizó una búsqueda electrónica en las bases de datos MEDLINE/PubMed 
EMBASE y CINAHL, de estudios prospectivos de cohorte publicados de enero de 2004 
a septiembre de 2014. La selección de artículos fue restringida a estudios en los
que la definición de GPG siguiera las recomendaciones del IOM; y estudios
prospectivos de cohorte incluyendo los descendientes ≥ a 15 años de edad, con
diferentes definiciones de GPG, independiente de la definición utilizada.
Resultados Nueve estudios prospectivos cumplieron los criterios de inclusión.
Cinco estudios utilizaron las recomendaciones del IOM para la evaluación de GPG, 
y seis estudios evaluaron indicadores de adiposidad o enfermedades metabólicas en
los descendientes ≥ 15 años. En siete de los nueve estudios, se observó que a
mayor GPG de la madre, de cualquier categoría de peso pre gestacional, mayor
adiposidad y prevalencia de otros componentes del síndrome metabólico. Debido a
las limitaciones explicadas en el estudio la evidencia de la asociación es baja. 
Conclusiones Los resultados de esta revisión muestran que independientemente de
los criterios utilizados para diagnosticar el aumento de la GPG, todos los
estudios muestran consistentemente una asociación entre la GPG y los indicadores 
de adiposidad u otros componentes del síndrome metabólico en la niñez, durante la
adolescencia o la edad adulta. Sin embargo, debido a las limitaciones de los
estudios, la fuerza de la evidencia es baja. Son necesarios estudios mejor
diseñados para confirmar esta asociación con una mayor fuerza de la evidencia.
Copyright AULA MEDICA EDICIONES 2014. Published by AULA MEDICA. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.3305/nh.2015.31.4.8297 
PMID: 25795930  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

