
1. Int J Obes (Lond). 2015 May;39(5):762-9. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2014.195. Epub 2014 Nov
12.

The impact of adiposity on adipose tissue-resident lymphocyte activation in
humans.

Travers RL(1), Motta AC(2), Betts JA(1), Bouloumié A(3), Thompson D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department for Health, University of Bath, Bath, UK.
(2)Unilever R&D Vlaardingen, Vlaardingen, The Netherlands.
(3)INSERM U1048, Institut des maladies métaboliques et cardiovasculaires and
Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: The presence of T lymphocytes in human adipose tissue has 
only recently been demonstrated and relatively little is known of their potential
relevance in the development of obesity-related diseases. We aimed to further
characterise these cells and in particular to investigate how they interact with 
modestly increased levels of adiposity typical of common overweight and obesity.
SUBJECTS/METHODS: Subcutaneous adipose tissue and fasting blood samples were
obtained from healthy males aged 35-55 years with waist circumferences in lean
(<94 cm), overweight (94-102 cm) and obese (>102 cm) categories. Adipose
tissue-resident CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes together with macrophages were
identified by gene expression and flow cytometry. T lymphocytes were further
characterised by their expression of activation markers CD25 and CD69. Adipose
tissue inflammation was investigated using gene expression analysis and tissue
culture.
RESULTS: Participants reflected a range of adiposity from lean to class I
obesity. Expression of CD4 (T-helper cells) and CD68 (macrophage), as well as
FOXP3 RNA transcripts, was elevated in subcutaneous adipose tissue with increased
levels of adiposity (P<0.001, P<0.001 and P=0.018, respectively). Flow cytometry 
revealed significant correlations between waist circumference and levels of CD25 
and CD69 expression per cell on activated adipose tissue-resident CD4+ and CD8+ T
lymphocytes (P-values ranging from 0.053 to <0.001). No such relationships were
found with blood T lymphocytes. This increased T lymphocyte activation was
related to increased expression and secretion of various pro- and
anti-inflammatory cytokines from subcutaneous whole adipose tissue explants.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to demonstrate that even modest levels of
overweight/obesity elicit modifications in adipose tissue immune function. Our
results underscore the importance of T lymphocytes during adipose tissue
expansion, and the presence of potential compensatory mechanisms that may work to
counteract adipose tissue inflammation, possibly through an increased number of
T-regulatory cells.

DOI: 10.1038/ijo.2014.195 
PMCID: PMC4424387
PMID: 25388403  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

